In the previous unit, we learned how
to implement the gate logic using HDL.
However, nothing in what we did
guarantees that the HDL code that
we wrote is actually correct.
We have no idea if this architecture
that we put together delivers
the intended results of the chip
that we seek to design.
So in this unit, we will close this
gap and we will learn how we can take
an HDL program and verify to the best
of our ability that the program or
the HDL file delivers the intended
functionality of the underlying chip.
Now here is the big picture
of what we're going to do.
Given that we have a particular
HDL file and we want to test it,
we can load it into a special
program called hardware simulator.
We have written such program and
made it available to you, in our website.
This program happens to to
to be written in, in Java.
And this program is designed to
simulate and test HDL files.
So we load it into this program.
We interactively test all sorts
of operations in this chip and
we call this mode of testing
interactive simulation.
Alternatively we can
write another file and
using a special language that we designed,
which we call the testing language,
something that you can
learn in a few minutes.
We can put together a set of replicable
tests that are predetermined.
So we don't have to do
things interactively.
We can think ahead of how we can
systematically test the underlying chip.
We write in what is
called a test script and
then we load into the simulator
two separate files.
We load the HDL code.
We load the test script and
then we send the simulator to work.
The simulator goes through every
step in the test script and subjects
the HDL code to the to the specified
tests in this supplied script.
We call this mode of operation
script-based simulation.
And finally, if we want, we can record
the output of the simulation on
something called an output file.
And we can even compare the results of
the simulation to a desired output,
which is stored in, in yet
another file called compare file.
So as you see,
there are many new concepts and
techniques involved in this
practice of hardware simulation.
And the purpose of this unit is to make,
you know,
all this new information concrete by
walking you through a step-by-step
process of testing a working example that
will accompany us throughout this unit.
Now, throughout this unit, we are going
to present several software tools.
Actually only one software tool,
the hardware simulator, and you are more
than welcome to stop the video.
Invoke this hardware simulator
on your own computer and
make sure that what we do can
be done also on your machine.
You can do all of this if you have
downloaded the software suite at
the beginning of the course and if so,
the hardware simulator should
be available on your computer.
And everything that we do in the lecture
can be done by by you as well.
So we encourage you to kick
tires as much as you please.
So let's go on and and start with
the with some concrete examples.
So here's the example that I'm
going to use throughout this unit.
It's an HDL file describing
the score chip that we talked about
in the previous unit so the code itself
should be familiar to you even though
it's not terribly important for
understanding this particular unit.
All right.
So once again the fact that we
wrote this very nice piece of code
does not imply in any way that
the code is actually correct.
In fact most likely it contains some
errors, either syntax errors or
logical errors or, or whatnot.
So how do we test it?
Well, here's what we can do.
We can invoke the hardware simulator.
Program starts running.
We can load the HDL file
into this simulator and
we can then enter zeroes and
ones into the a and
b inputs and
observe what is going on inside the chip.
Now, how do we observe what is going on?
Well, we have to tell the simulator
to evaluate the chip's logic.
The simulator will not do anything
until we, we tell it to actually
consider the new inputs that we
entered and evaluate the chip's logic.
And if we do this, the simulator will take
these values, these zeroes and ones, or
whatever we entered, and will kind of
pipe them through the architecture.
And at some point, something will come out
from the from the output pin of the chip,
so at that point,
we can inspect what actually materialized.
So we can observe
the outputs of the chip and
in this particular case,
the value of the out pin and
if we want, we can also inspect
the values of the internal pins.
Pins like not b, not a and so on,
and the simulator gives us all
these all these nice capabilities.
In particular, here's an example or
screenshot of the hardware
simulator in action and
the simulator contains features,
several different panes.
So, let's talk about each one
of these panes in isolation.
First of all,
at the bottom-left of the screen,
we see the HDL code that we
have loaded into the simulator.
This is a static view.
We cannot manipulate or edit this code.
If we want to edit anything,
we have to use an external text editor,
change the HDL code and reload it.
So this pane you know,
gives us an idea of what is it,
what is it exactly that we
loaded into the simulator.
Here we can actually interact with
the input panes of the simulator.
We can click them and change the values.
We have four different
possibilities of zeroes and
ones in, in this particular example.
Now this is very simple chip.
And once we do this,
we can click this icon.
Which looks like a calculator, and once we
click it, we basically tell the simulator
to evaluate the chip's logic
on the supplied inputs.
At this point the simulator
will spin its wheels.
It will take a fraction of a second and
something will come out.
We can then evaluate
the output of the chip.
In this particular case we have
only one output called out.
And once again if we
want we can also inspect
the the current values
of the internal pins.
So altogether this GUI gives
us everything that we need.
In order to carry out sort of hands on
interactive simulation of of exalt chip or
any other chip for this matter.
All right,
moving along I would like now to give you
actually a hands on example of of
the hardware simulator in action.
So let's do that and
then go back to the to the lecture.
This is the hardware simulator.
And, in order to use it,
we have to first of all,
load an HDL program into the simulator.
And, we do it by clicking this icon here.
So, let us do it.
And, we see that we are in
the nand2tetris folder,
so within this folder,
we're going to select Projects.
And within Projects,
we'll select Project 0.
And we see that we have a single
HDL file here, so let us select it.
This is Xor file that we discussed before.
And we loaded the chip into the simulator.
[COUGH] Now the pane at the bottom left,
right here
gives me a display of
the file that I just loaded.
I can scroll back and forth.
It's not separate,
it's not terribly useful but
this pane is actually
just a read only display.
There's no way to actually change the code
when you are inside the simulator.
If you want to change the code, you have
to do it using an external text editor and
then you have to reload, of course, the
file that you changed and saved elsewhere.
So, let us assume that we
are happy with this file and
I want to actually
simulate the chip logic.
Well I do this by first of all looking
at the current input values and
we see that the default values of the a
and b inputs of Xor chip happen to be 0.
So if I want, I can go ahead and
change one of them,
or both of them to some other values.
So let us change A to 1 and let us
change and let us also change b to one.
And I noticed that nothing yet
happened in order to, to see how
the chip responds to these changes.
I have to reevaluate the chip logic and
I do it by.
By clicking this icon here,
the calculator icon.
So let us do it and we see that once we
click this icon, the output becomes 0.
And [COUGH] indeed Xor of 1 and one is 1.
If you want to see some
other possibilities,
we can once again manipulate
one of the input panes.
Click the calculator, and
we see that Xor now emits, 1 instead of 0.
Another thing that we can do is,
inspect the values
of the internal pins which gives us yet
another level of
scrutiny in particular when we,
when we try to debug the chip and
understand why it is misbehaving for
some reason.
So this has been a very brief description
of the first thing that we do when
you use a simulator, you load the chip,
you play with the input panes,
you inspect the outputs and
the internal pins, and and
this is the ABC of of chip debugging and
testing.
I wish to remind you in closing that
if you want to change the chip logic,.
You have to edit the HDL file
using some external text editor.
Save the new file,
reload it into the simulator and
rerun the tests in order to
test the new chip design.
Now, interactive simulation is,
is very nice indeed, but
at some point it can become rather
tedious, especially if you have you know,
lots of bugs in your design and
and each time you have to,
you know, go through the same set
of tests and so on and so forth.
So, with that in mind.
We are fortunate that we also have the
notion of a test script available to us.
So here once again is the tested chip.
And by the way,
I allow myself to use the words chip and
gate interchangeably for me,
a gate is simply a, a simple chip.
So this is the tested chip.
And here is an example of a test
script designed to test a Xor gate.
Now let us go through the test
script kind of line by line.
The first command in the test
script instruct the simulator
to load the Xor.hdl file into the program.
So even this step is, is taken care of.
We don't have to do it ourselves.
The test script will,
will load the program for us.
By the way, this is terribly important
if you do repetitive debugging,
because how do you debug a gate?
You use an external text editor you know,
to change the gate, and then you,
you click Save, and
you go back to the simulator.
So, it's important to remember to reload
the new version of the edited chips.
So, that's why we added this command
that to, to the test script.
Now, once the test once the hdl
is loaded into the simulator,
the test grid begins
a process of subjecting
the chip to to four different tests.
The semicolon represents you know,
the ending of of one
particular test if you will.
And so, we set the input
values of the chip to 0 and 0.
We evaluate the chip logic and
observe the results and
then we go through the next test and
and so on and so forth until we
complete all the possible all,
all the input possibilities for
this particular chip.
So this is how we carry out script ba,
script-based testing.
And it has many benefits.
And far and foremost is the fact
that we don't have to do anything
laboriously, you know,
using our own sort of intuition.
Because everything is pre-determined.
We have a set of rep,
replicable tests and we just.
Use the same tests over and
over whenever we
we debug the chip which can be you know,
two weeks or two months from now.
So it's good to know that you can
always repeat the same set of tests.
So, altogether,
we will try to always use a test script.
And the good news is that you don't really
have to worry about how to write test
scripts because we are going to supply to
you all the test scripts that you need
in order to test the the chips that,
that you are going to design in hdl.
So you worry about the hdl and
we are going to worry about
the the testing of of your work.
Another thing that we can do is keep
track of the outputs of the simulation.
So in particular we can augment our basic
test scripts with something
like the following commands.
We can at the beginning of the of the test
when we initialize things, we can.
Instruct the simulator to
create an output file,
which in this example,
we happen to call Xor.out.
And as we go through
the through the testing.
At the end of each test,
we tell the simulator to output to
the output file a set of values,
which is determined in
the preamble of the script.
So, as you see the third line with script
says, the output placed is a, b, and out.
And so whenever the simulator
would see the directive output,
it will write to the output file,
the current values of a, b and out.
And at the end of the simulation,
we can simply inspect the result of
the output file and convince our self that
the chip has actually behaved
according to expectations.
In fact, in this particular example,
if you will inspect the output file
that emerged from the simulation,
you will notice that it is completely
identical to the truth table of Xor gate.
So it looks like the gate
is well behaving.
So here's a snapshot of the hardware
simulation in action using a test script.
And once again, we have the HDL code as,
as we did before at the bottom left of,
of the screen.
But we, but we now have something new.
We have a test script,
which can be seen on the right pane.
Which is some sort of
a multipurpose GUI area,
which we use for for different purposes.
And after we load the script,
we can instruct the simulator
to actually execute the script.
We do it by clicking this control and
the simulator the simulator goes to work.
And at the end, if we want,
we can inspect the resulting output file.
And here is also a demo of
of the same thing with,
with an actual how do simulations session.
We will now show how to use
the how to simulator in
order to test an HDL program
using a test script.
So the first thing that we can do is
load the HDL program into the simulator.
So let us choose the same Xor.hdl
chip that we used before and
then instead of playing with
the input pins interactively.
We can use this icon here
to open a test script and
we see that in the project zero folder,
we have one test script called Xor.tst.
So let us load it into
the simulator environment.
Once we do it this pane in
the interface shows us the contents of
the currently loaded test script and
we see that it begins with a few comments.
And then following that,
we see the actual testing commands.
And the first command or
the next command to be executed,
is highlighted by a yellow bar,
we can call it the cursor
of the of the test script.
Now we see that each command
ends either with a comma or
a semicolon and
when we click the play icon,
the simulator is going to
execute all the testing
commands until the next
semicolon is encountered.
Now the first four commands in this test
strip set up the simulation so to speak.
And so let us, let us execute them.
So I click this icon here.
And we see that the cursor moved
to the next batch of commands.
And this batch says,
set a to 0, set b to 0.
These are the input pins
of this particular chip.
And then evaluate the chip logic and
output the result into the output file.
So let us execute this
batch of commands and
we see that indeed, the a and
b inputs are now 0 and
the out of the chip happens to be 0,
which seems to be right.
Because as we know, Xor of and
zero and zero should be zero.
So let us execute the next
batch of test script commands.
This batch sets a to 0 and
b to 1, evaluates the shapes and
outputs the result and indeed,
we see that Xor of 0 and
0 ended up being 1,
which seems to be correct.
So executing the next batch of
commands sets a to 0, I'm sorry.
Sets a to 1 and b to 0 giving the result
1, which also seems to be correct.
And then moving along,
we execute the next and
final batch of commands,
which set both a and b to one.
And we see that the Xor response
by emitting the value zero,
which once again seems to be correct.
Now the test script for
Xor gate is relatively simple,
because basically,
it simply executes every possible input
combination as stated by
the chip truth table.
In more complex shapes such an exhaustive
testing is is less feasible.
And therefore, the test, testing
scripts will likely be more complex.
Now, as we tested this script
the script has also written
the results of every test script
batch into the output file.
You know, this is the the result of
saying output in, in the I'm sorry.
This is the result of,
of the output command.
Now, if we want to inspect
the output file, we can do so
by going to this control here and
selecting Output.
So let's do that.
And once we do it,
we see that the output file,
indeed looks exactly, like the truth
table of Xor and this gives us yet
another indication that the chip
has operated to a specification.
Before we go on with this
step by step working example,
I would like to stop for
a minute or two and
say some general things about the general
concept of hardware simulators.
So first of all, there are many of them.
Some of them are free and open source.
Others are proprietary and
very sophisticated and very expensive.
And in this course, we use a simple
hardware simulator, which at the same
time, gives you everything that you need
in order to build the head computer and
any other computer that you want
to build using the techniques
described in the course.
So the supplied hardware simulator,
which you have on your computer now is a,
is a tool that once again,
gives you everything you need.
And if you want to learn how to use it,
there are several places to consult
with available documentation.
If you go to the nand2tetris .org
website you can find a full chapter,
I think it's appendix a and appen,
actually appendix and appendix b.
In our book describe how to
use the hardware simulator and
these, these chapters are also
available freely on the website and
another thing that you should do is go for
the hardware simulator tutorial,
which is a stack of interacting slides
that that explain how to use the simulator
as well as all of the examples that
you saw in this particular lecture.
So that's the end of of the commercial
break about hardware simulators and
we return to our ongoing example.
So let us revisit what we have done so
far.
We looked at a particular HDL file,
which records the logic of Xor.
We have supplied the simulator with
a test script designed to
test this particular code.
And we also looked at
the resulting output file and
convinced ourself that the HDL
file is actually correct.
Now this privilege of looking at
an output file and saying, yeah,
it works is something which is rarely
available in real life testing.
Why?
Because the chips that we normally build
are far more complex than Xor gate.
And there is no way to look
at an output file of let's
say an ALU or, or a CPU chip or
something like that.
And, and say, yeah, it works correctly.
You know, it's we, we have to do it in,
in a far more systematic and planned way.
So is there a way to do it?
Well, you bet.
And that's,
that's what we're going to do next.
In particular,
we can carry out the simulation with yet
another tool which is
called a compare file.
So here's an example of a compare file.
It looks exactly like an output file.
And in fact, in its previous incarnation,
the compare file was a,
a, an output file of
a well-behaving Xor chips.
So someone, and
we'll talk about this someone momentarily,
someone has written an Xor chip correctly.
Ran it thru the simulator,
generated an output file.
Renamed it compare file and gave it us.
And said, now you go and build your
chip and, and compare it to what I did.
So basically, we can take the compare
file and load it into the simulator and
then start to do the simulator as
the simulation as we did before.
And now, in each step of the simulation,
whenever we output a set
of selected pin values,
the simulator will compare the output
set of values to the respective
line in the compare file.
And if the two lines will
not agree with each other.
The simulator will not
throw a comparison error.
So this gives us that ability to not
only record the outputs of the chip,
but also compare them to desired results.
So you probably asked yourself once again,
how do we generate these
compare files to begin with?
Right?
Well, we,
we could have left it as as a mystery, but
there is no need to to
leave anything unexplained.
So here's how we do it.
We do it using something
called behavioral simulation.
In particular,
consider this Xor gate that we saw before.
And let us assume, once again that
this implementation is correct and
we put it into the simulator
along with the script.
We run it, we generate results and
then we simply rename it to be Xor.cmp and
it becomes the official
compare file of this shape.
So what is special about this slide,
didn't, didn't you say,
everything that we said here before.
Well, we did, but
there's one detail which is, which is
remarkably interesting in this in
this notion of behavioral simulation.
And, and the thing which is
interesting is that the chip
logic can be implemented in any
way that the designer wishes.
So we can write this chip logic in Java or
some other high-level language.
We can run the program.
We can generate an output file and
then once again,
supply it as, as a compare file.
So this technique of
writing gate logic using or
implementing gate logic
using high-level language,
gives you the ability to plan and
test your hardware before you even write
a single line of HDL code, which is,
you know quite sophisticated
way to do things.
So we, you know,
we can do everything in a high-level and
only once the overall design
of our machine works properly,
we can begin to implement each
chip at the time in in HDL.
All right.
So this has been the notion of behavioral
simulation and I want to go on and
talk about how we actually carry
out hardware construction projects.
So the cast of characters in any
hardware construction project
consists of several players of which,
I would like talk about two.
First, we have the system architect.
Now the system architect is,
is the person who is told, you know,
go build a chip that supports a certain
function of a digit, digital camera or
something like that or go build a chip
that monitors a certain medical device.
So the architect has the exact sort of
user-level specifications of the chip and
and the other member in the team
is a developer or, you know,
more than one developer or
more than one architects and together,
they have to design this chip.
So how do they do it?
Well, the system architect looks at the
overall desired operation of of the chip.
And then he or she makes some decisions
about how to break this overall
behavior into a set of smaller chips if
you will or sort of lower-level chips.
And then for each one of these chips,
the architect,
the architect creates a chip API,
which consists of the name of the chip,
the names of its input and output pins.
A test script and a compare file.
Now, all these things are prepared
by the system architect who,
you know, may, may or may not have some
people to help him or her in his work.
And finally, given these resources,
the developers can actually go out and
build the chip.
So the architecture can do
behavioral simulation or
they can do whatever they want in order to
test that everything fits together nicely.
And at some point, the developers
actually build this thing using HDL.
So, once again, that's,
that's an example of well
planned modular design and gives
another example of divide and conquer.
You know,
taking something very complicated and
breaking into something more, you know,
a set of more manageable modules.
Each of which can be created and
tested in isolation.
So for example, the HEC computer I
could've told you something like go
build yourself a computer and
actually that's what we do in this course.
But we split this job into
the construction of something like 30,
you know 30 different shapes that
together comprise the HEC chip set.
So we, Norm and I, the course instructors,
we play the role of
the system architects and
you guys are playing the roles of
the actual hardware developers.
All right.
So the developer's view,
your view of a particular chip.
You know, when we tell you to
build a chip, here's what you get.
You're going to get a stub file
that contains the documentation
of the chip that you have to build,
along with its interface.
You're also going to get a test
script that we have written for you.
You're going to get a compare file and
then, you know,
taken together, what you've
basically got is everything that you
need in order to number one,
understand the interface.
Understand what the chip is supposed
to do, the compare file and
we'll also tell you how
we are going to test it.
All right.
So what do you do with
all these resources?
Well what you have to do is write
the missing implementation.
The missing implementation is the HDL
code that should actually drive this
entire show.
So that's exactly what we're
going to do in unit 1.7.
But before we go onto this unit,
we also have to say a few things about
Multi-Bit Buses, which is a gap that
we still have to close in in the general
description of HDL programming.